Flow Charts

A flow chart is a diagram that contains symbols, boxes and text all connected by arrows to show the “flow” of the program.
It is very similar to pseudo-code except is a bit more detailed. 
Flow charts show the many paths a program can take, showing every possible situation that the program must deal with._
There are 3 different symbols used in flow charts: rounded rectangles, parallelograms, and rectangles._
The rounded rectangle indicates the terminals of the program. It is used to show the start and the end of the program. _
 
The parallelograms are used to indicate any Input/Output operations. 
If the program needs to output any information to the user, for example, asking a question, 
or needs to take input from the user, for example, taking the answer of a question, the parallelogram is used._
  
The last symbol used is the normal rectangle. The rectangle indicates a process. 
If the computer must do a mathematical process or must assign a value to a variable, the rectangle is used._
 
There is usually text inside each of these symbols that explains what is happening in the code._

There are 4 different possible structures of a flow chart: Sequence, Decision, Repetition, and Case._

Sequence is a series of actions that occurs in order.
The flow chart will show sequence with basic arrows between each symbol, starting at the top and ending at the bottom._

Decision is when there are multiple possible actions the program can take, 
but will choose one depending on whether a condition is met._
A new symbol is used to show decision. 
A diamond shape will contain a yes/no question, and depending on the answer to the question, either a yes path will be taken
or a no path will be taken._
It is not necessary for both a yes or no path to exist. 
It is possible to only have either a yes or no path, and if a path does not exist, the program will continue
without doing anything._
 
Repetition is used to show a part of the program that will repeat. This is also known as a loop._

The diamond symbol is used to ask a yes/no question, and depending on the answer to the question, 
the program can enter the loop. If the condition is met, the program will enter the loop and go to a rectangle, 
to show a function._
After the function, the diagram shows an arrow back to the diamond to ask the question again._
This will continue to loop until the condition in the diamond is not met and the program will continue 
instead of entering the loop again._

Case structure is very similar to the decision structure._
A diamond is used to ask a question, except instead of only a yes or no question, the question can have multiple answers. 
Each answer will lead to a different function, so it looks similar to the decision structure
only with more than 2 possible paths the program can take._
 
As flow charts can get very long depending on the program, it is necessary to know about connectors. 
A connector is used when a flow chart does not fit on a single page and must continue to the next page. 
A connector is represented by a circle._

The final thing to learn about flow charts is modules. 
In computer programming, a computer function is often done in a method._

If you want to show that a method is called in a flow chart, there is a special symbol for it. 
A separate flowchart can be made to explain the function of the method used in a module is necessary. 
The symbol for a module looks like a rectangle with 2 lines through it, vertically._

Of course, the different structures of flow charts can be combined. This is usually the case for actual programs. 
For example: A decision can lead to a loop that continues on to a sequence that goes to another decision, etc. 

END_
